-----------------------------------------------------------------
                    Computation of the Hypervolume

        Carlos Fonseca, Manuel López-Ibáñez and Luís Paquete
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Contents

    * Introduction
    * Usage
    * License
    * Download


------------
Introduction
------------

This program implements a recursive, dimension-sweep algorithm for
computing the hypervolume indicator of the quality of a set of n
non-dominated points in d dimensions. It also incorporates a
recent result for the three-dimensional special case. The proposed
algorithm achieves O(n^{d-2} log n) time and linear space complexity
in the worst-case, but experimental results show that the pruning
techniques used may reduce the time complexity even further.

Relevant literature:

[1] Carlos M. Fonseca, Luís Paquete, and Manuel López-Ibáñez. An
    improved dimension-sweep algorithm for the hypervolume
    indicator. In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, pages
    1157-1163, Vancouver, Canada, July 2006.

[2] Luís Paquete, Carlos M. Fonseca and Manuel López-Ibáñez. An
    optimal algorithm for a special case of Klee's measure problem in
    three dimensions. Technical Report CSI-RT-I-01/2006, CSI,
    Universidade do Algarve, 2006.


------------
Usage
------------

In GNU/Linux, the program can be compiled from source by doing
make. We recommend that you compile it specifically for your
architecture using GCC option -march=, since this would reduce
computation time. You can use the Makefile provided to do it. For
example, for a Intel Pentium 4 architecture you would use the command:

$ make march=pentium4

Check GCC documentation for the names of the architectures supported
by your version of GCC.


The program reads a set of points provided by filenames in the command
line:

$ hv data

or standard input:

$ cat data | hv


A reference point can be given by the option -r. If no reference point
is given, the default is the maximum value for each coordinate from
the input points.

$ hv -r "10 10 10" data

For the remainder options available, check the output of hv --help.


------------
License
------------

This software is Copyright (C) 2006 Carlos Fonseca, Manuel
López-Ibáñez and Luís Paquete.

This program is free software (software libre); you can redistribute
it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Please be aware that the fact that this program is
released as Free Software does not excuse you from scientific
propriety, which obligates you to give appropriate credit! If you
write a scientific paper describing research that made substantive use
of this program, it is your obligation as a scientist to (a) mention
the fashion in which this software was used in the Methods section;
(b) mention the algorithm in the References section. The appropriate
citation is: Carlos M. Fonseca, Luís Paquete, and Manuel
López-Ibáñez. An improved dimension-sweep algorithm for the
hypervolume indicator. In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation,
pages 1157-1163, Vancouver, Canada, July 2006. Moreover, as a personal
note, I would appreciate it if you would email
m.lopez-ibanez@napier.ac.uk with citations of papers referencing this
work so I can mention them to my funding agent and tenure committee.

------------
History
------------

Version 1.1

    * Warn for empty input files.

    * Compute hypervolume for two-dimensional data using 2D algorithm
      even if recursion is set to stop in dimension 3.

Version 1.0

    * Basic compilation: make march=pentium

    * Select one of the variants (1, 2, 3, or 4) described in the
      paper [1]: make march=pentium VARIANT=4

    * Usage: hv [OPTIONS] [FILE...]

   Calculate the hypervolume of the union set of all input FILEs.
   With no FILE, or when FILE is -, read standard input.

   Options:
    -h, --help       print this summary and exit.
        --version    print version number and exit.
    -v, --verbose    print some information (time, input points, output
               points, etc). Default is --quiet.
    -q, --quiet      print just the hypervolume (as opposed to --verbose).
    -r, --reference=POINT use POINT as reference point. POINT must be within
                     quotes, e.g., "10 10 10". If no reference point is
                     given, it is taken as the maximum value for each
                     coordinate from the input points.
    -1, --stop-on-1D    stop recursion in dimension 1
    -2, --stop-on-2D    stop recursion in dimension 2
    -3, --stop-on-3D    stop recursion in dimension 3    (default)
